README.md, before:

# Fast serialization library

[![Tests](https://github.com/vuryss/serializer/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/vuryss/serializer/actions/workflows/tests.yml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/vuryss/serializer/graph/badge.svg?token=kK0ZHh3raA)](https://codecov.io/gh/vuryss/serializer)
[![Codacy Badge](https://app.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/760e3d4f985248fd8bb47b947873b847)](https://app.codacy.com/gh/vuryss/serializer/dashboard?utm_source=gh&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=&utm_campaign=Badge_grade)
[![CodeFactor](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/vuryss/serializer/badge)](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/vuryss/serializer)
![GitHub Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/vuryss/serializer)
![GitHub License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/vuryss/serializer)

Serializes and deserializes complex data structures to and from json.
Ideas taken from Symfony's Serializer component, Serde and others.

Symfony serializer was very flexible, but also very slow. This library tries to be as fast as possible.

Supports modern PHP projects with fully typed properties. Older codebases with no types would not work.

- [Fast serialization library](#fast-serialization-library)
  * [Installation](#installation)
  * [Features](#features)
    + [Serialization](#serialization)
    + [Deserialization](#deserialization)
    + [Caching - optional, but highly recommended, otherwise the library will be slow](#caching---optional--but-highly-recommended--otherwise-the-library-will-be-slow)
    + [Custom object property serialized name](#custom-object-property-serialized-name)
    + [Serialization groups](#serialization-groups)
    + [Deserialization groups](#deserialization-groups)
    + [Custom date format](#custom-date-format)
    + [Enforce date format](#enforce-date-format)
    + [Ignore property](#ignore-property)
    + [Handling of NULL values](#handling-of-null-values)
    + [Support for json serializable objects](#support-for-json-serializable-objects)
    + [Support for Symfony Serializer attributes](#support-for-symfony-serializer-attributes)
  * [Build, run & test locally](#build--run---test-locally)

## Installation

```bash
composer require vuryss/serializer
```

## Features

### Serialization

- Properties are serialized if they are either public or have a getter method.

```php
$person = new Person();
$person->firstName = 'Maria';
$person->lastName = 'Valentina';
$person->age = 36;
$person->isStudent = false;

$serializer = new Serializer();
$json = $serializer->serialize($person);
// {"firstName":"Maria","lastName":"Valentina","age":36,"isStudent":false}
```

### Deserialization

- Properties are deserialized if they are public, instantiable in public constructor or have a setter method.

```php
$json = '{"firstName":"Maria","lastName":"Valentina","age":36,"isStudent":false}';
$serializer = new Serializer();
$person = $serializer->deserialize($json, Person::class);
```

### Caching - optional, but highly recommended, otherwise the library will be slow

Supports PSR-6 CacheItemPoolInterface: <https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-6/#cacheitempoolinterface>

No need to chain in-memory cache with external cache, the library will do it for you.
Cache will be called once per used class (used in serialization or deserialization), then will be cached in memory until the script ends.

```php
$pst6cache = new CacheItemPool(); // Some PSR-6 cache implementation
$serializer = new Serializer(
    metadataExtractor: new CachedMetadataExtractor(
        new MetadataExtractor(),
        $pst6cache,
    ),
);
```

### Custom object property serialized name

```php
class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(name: 'changedPropertyName')]
    public string $someProperty;
}
```

### Serialization groups

```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(groups: ['group1'])]
    public string $property1;

    // Has implicit group 'default'
    public string $property2;
}


$serializer = new Serializer();
$object = new SomeClass();
$object->property1 = 'value1';
$object->property2 = 'value2';
$serializer->serialize($object, context: [Context::GROUPS => ['group1']]); // {"property1":"value1"}
```

### Deserialization groups

```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(groups: ['group1'])]
    public string $property1;

    // Has implicit group 'default'
    public string $property2;
}


$serializer = new Serializer();
$data = '{"property1":"value1","property2":"value2"}';
$object = $serializer->deserialize($data, SomeClass::class, context: [Context::GROUPS => ['group1']]);
isset($object->property1); // true
isset($object->property2); // false
```

### Custom date format

On serialization the format will always be respected. On deserialization the format will be used to parse the date.
However on deserialization by default if the date is not in the provided format, it will be parsed as is, given that
DateTime constructor can parse it.

Per property:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(context: [Context::DATETIME_FORMAT => 'Y-m-d'])]
    public DateTime $someDate;
}
```

Or globally:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

$serializer = new Serializer(
    context: [
        Context::DATETIME_FORMAT => \DateTimeInterface::RFC2822,
    ]
);
```

### Enforce date format

If strict data time format is required during deserialization then, you can use the
`Context::DATETIME_FORMAT_STRICT` context option:

Per property:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(context: [
        Context::DATETIME_FORMAT => 'Y-m-d',
        Context::DATETIME_FORMAT_STRICT => true
    ])]
    public DateTime $someDate;
}
```

Or globally:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

$serializer = new Serializer(
    context: [
        Context::DATETIME_FORMAT => 'Y-m-d',
        Context::DATETIME_FORMAT_STRICT => true
    ]
);
```

### Ignore property

Those properties will not be included in the serialized values during serialization and will not be populated with
provided values during deserialization.

```php
class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(ignore: true)]
    public string $someProperty;
}
```

### Handling of NULL values

- By default, NULL values are included in the serialized value.

To disable this you can use the `Context::SKIP_NULL_VALUES` context option:

Per property:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(context: [Context::SKIP_NULL_VALUES => true])]
    public ?string $someProperty;
}
```

Or globally:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

$serializer = new Serializer(
    context: [
        Context::SKIP_NULL_VALUES => true,
    ]
);
```

### Support for json serializable objects

If an object implements the `JsonSerializable` interface, the `jsonSerialize` method will be called and the result will be serialized.

### Support for Symfony Serializer attributes

This library aims to be a drop-in replacement for Symfony Serializer. It supports the following attributes:
- Groups
- SerializedName
- Ignore
- DiscriminatorMap

## Build, run & test locally

To enter the prepared container environment:

```bash
docker-compose up -d
docker-compose exec library bash
```

Install package dependencies:

```bash
composer install -o
```

Run tests:

```bash
composer test
```

HTML Coverage locally:

```bash
XDEBUG_MODE=coverage vendor/bin/pest --coverage --coverage-html=coverage
```

Commit message:

doc: Adding some missing parts of the doc

README.md, after:

# Fast serialization library

[![Tests](https://github.com/vuryss/serializer/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/vuryss/serializer/actions/workflows/tests.yml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/vuryss/serializer/graph/badge.svg?token=kK0ZHh3raA)](https://codecov.io/gh/vuryss/serializer)
[![Codacy Badge](https://app.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/760e3d4f985248fd8bb47b947873b847)](https://app.codacy.com/gh/vuryss/serializer/dashboard?utm_source=gh&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=&utm_campaign=Badge_grade)
[![CodeFactor](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/vuryss/serializer/badge)](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/vuryss/serializer)
![GitHub Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/vuryss/serializer)
![GitHub License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/vuryss/serializer)

Serializes and deserializes complex data structures to and from json.
Ideas taken from Symfony's Serializer component, Serde and others.

Symfony serializer was very flexible, but also very slow. This library tries to be as fast as possible.

Supports modern PHP projects with fully typed properties. Older codebases with no types would not work.

Benchmarks comparing this library with Symfony Serializer and Serde can be found here: [Here](https://github.com/vuryss/serializer-benchmark)

- [Fast serialization library](#fast-serialization-library)
  * [Installation](#installation)
  * [Features](#features)
    + [Serialization](#serialization)
    + [Deserialization](#deserialization)
    + [Caching - optional, but highly recommended, otherwise the library will be slow](#caching---optional--but-highly-recommended--otherwise-the-library-will-be-slow)
    + [Custom object property serialized name](#custom-object-property-serialized-name)
    + [Serialization groups](#serialization-groups)
    + [Deserialization groups](#deserialization-groups)
    + [Custom date format](#custom-date-format)
    + [Enforce date format](#enforce-date-format)
    + [Convert date to timezone](#convert-date-to-timezone)
    + [Ignore property](#ignore-property)
    + [Handling of NULL values](#handling-of-null-values)
    + [Support for json serializable objects](#support-for-json-serializable-objects)
    + [Support for Symfony Serializer attributes](#support-for-symfony-serializer-attributes)
  * [Build, run & test locally](#build--run---test-locally)

## Installation

```bash
composer require vuryss/serializer
```

## Features

### Serialization

- Properties are serialized if they are either public or have a getter method.

```php
$person = new Person();
$person->firstName = 'Maria';
$person->lastName = 'Valentina';
$person->age = 36;
$person->isStudent = false;

$serializer = new Serializer();
$json = $serializer->serialize($person);
// {"firstName":"Maria","lastName":"Valentina","age":36,"isStudent":false}
```

### Deserialization

- Properties are deserialized if they are public, instantiable in public constructor or have a setter method.

```php
$json = '{"firstName":"Maria","lastName":"Valentina","age":36,"isStudent":false}';
$serializer = new Serializer();
$person = $serializer->deserialize($json, Person::class);
```

### Caching - optional, but highly recommended, otherwise the library will be slow

Supports PSR-6 CacheItemPoolInterface: <https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-6/#cacheitempoolinterface>

No need to chain in-memory cache with external cache, the library will do it for you.
Cache will be called once per used class (used in serialization or deserialization), then will be cached in memory until the script ends.

```php
$pst6cache = new CacheItemPool(); // Some PSR-6 cache implementation
$serializer = new Serializer(
    metadataExtractor: new CachedMetadataExtractor(
        new MetadataExtractor(),
        $pst6cache,
    ),
);
```

### Custom object property serialized name

```php
class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(name: 'changedPropertyName')]
    public string $someProperty;
}
```

### Serialization groups

```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(groups: ['group1'])]
    public string $property1;

    // Has implicit group 'default'
    public string $property2;
}


$serializer = new Serializer();
$object = new SomeClass();
$object->property1 = 'value1';
$object->property2 = 'value2';
$serializer->serialize($object, context: [Context::GROUPS => ['group1']]); // {"property1":"value1"}
```

### Deserialization groups

```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(groups: ['group1'])]
    public string $property1;

    // Has implicit group 'default'
    public string $property2;
}


$serializer = new Serializer();
$data = '{"property1":"value1","property2":"value2"}';
$object = $serializer->deserialize($data, SomeClass::class, context: [Context::GROUPS => ['group1']]);
isset($object->property1); // true
isset($object->property2); // false
```

### Custom date format

On serialization the format will always be respected. On deserialization the format will be used to parse the date.
However on deserialization by default if the date is not in the provided format, it will be parsed as is, given that
DateTime constructor can parse it.

Per property:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(context: [Context::DATETIME_FORMAT => 'Y-m-d'])]
    public DateTime $someDate;
}
```

Or globally:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

$serializer = new Serializer(
    context: [
        Context::DATETIME_FORMAT => \DateTimeInterface::RFC2822,
    ]
);
```

### Enforce date format

If strict data time format is required during deserialization then, you can use the
`Context::DATETIME_FORMAT_STRICT` context option:

Per property:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(context: [
        Context::DATETIME_FORMAT => 'Y-m-d',
        Context::DATETIME_FORMAT_STRICT => true
    ])]
    public DateTime $someDate;
}
```

Or globally:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

$serializer = new Serializer(
    context: [
        Context::DATETIME_FORMAT => 'Y-m-d',
        Context::DATETIME_FORMAT_STRICT => true
    ]
);
```

### Convert date to timezone

After denormalization, the `DateTime` object can be converted to a specific timezone.

Per property:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(context: [Context::DATETIME_TARGET_TIMEZONE => 'UTC'])]
    public DateTime $someDate;
}
```

Or globally:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

$serializer = new Serializer(
    context: [
        Context::DATETIME_TARGET_TIMEZONE => 'UTC',
    ]
);
```

### Ignore property

Those properties will not be included in the serialized values during serialization and will not be populated with
provided values during deserialization.

```php
class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(ignore: true)]
    public string $someProperty;
}
```

### Handling of NULL values

- By default, NULL values are included in the serialized value.

To disable this you can use the `Context::SKIP_NULL_VALUES` context option:

Per property:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

class SomeClass
{
    #[SerializerContext(context: [Context::SKIP_NULL_VALUES => true])]
    public ?string $someProperty;
}
```

Or globally:
```php
use Vuryss\Serializer\Context;

$serializer = new Serializer(
    context: [
        Context::SKIP_NULL_VALUES => true,
    ]
);
```

### Support for json serializable objects

If an object implements the `JsonSerializable` interface, the `jsonSerialize` method will be called and the result will be serialized.

### Support for Symfony Serializer attributes

This library aims to be a drop-in replacement for Symfony Serializer. It supports the following attributes:
- Groups
- SerializedName
- Ignore
- DiscriminatorMap

## Build, run & test locally

To enter the prepared container environment:

```bash
docker-compose up -d
docker-compose exec library bash
```

Install package dependencies:

```bash
composer install -o
```

Run tests:

```bash
composer test
```

HTML Coverage locally:

```bash
XDEBUG_MODE=coverage vendor/bin/pest --coverage --coverage-html=coverage
```
